IBX-4162 Map custom Field Type to GraphQL (#1928)
ezsystems/developer-documentation: docs/api/graphql/graphql_custom_ft.md

---
description: Add custom Field Types to GraphQL.
---

# Add custom Field Types to GraphQL

If you want to use custom Field Types in GraphQL, you need to map them.
Their values and field definition structure, need to be defined, for GraphQL to read them.
For example:

| Name | Possible field value      | Resolver| Field definition|
|------|------| ------- | ------- |
| Text Line     | string | default | `TextLineFieldDefinition`    |
| Relation List | `Item` `ArticleItem` `ImageItem` | customized | `RelationListFieldDefinitio` |

## Map a custom Field Type

There are two ways to map a custom Field Type:

- configuration
- custom `FieldDefinitionMapper`

> If the mapping of your Field Type depends on the field definition, you need to write a custom `FieldDefinitionMapper`.

Reviewer: I'd actually say with "if the behaviour of...". We could also add an example: "For example, the selection field type has a "multiple" option. If set to false, it will accept and return a single value, but if set to true, it will accept and return an array of values."

Otherwise, you can map with configuration.

### Map with configuration

To map a custom Field Type with configuration use a compiler pass to modify a container parameter, `ibexa.graphql.schema.content.mapping.field_definition_type`.

It is a hash that maps a Field Type identifier (`ezstring`) to the following entries:

> - `value_type` - the GraphQL type values of custom field. It can be a native type (string, int), or a custom type. If none is specified, string will be used.

Reviewer: "of the custom field"

- `value_resolver` - how values of this field are resolved and passed to the defined value type. If not specified, it will receive the `Field` object for the field type: `field`.

> - `definition_type` - the GraphQL type field definitions. If not specified, it will use `FieldDefinition`.

Reviewer: "GraphQL type the field definition is mapped to"

Compiler pass example that should be placed in `src/DependencyInjection/Compiler`:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/api/graphql/src/DependencyInjection/Compiler/MyCustomTypeGraphQLCompilerPass.php') =]]
```

### Map with a custom `FieldDefinitionMapper`

The `FieldDefinitionMapper` API uses service decorators.
To register your own mapper, make it decorate the
`Ibexa\GraphQL\Schema\Domain\Content\Mapper\FieldDefinition\DecoratingFieldDefinitionMapper` service:

```yaml
services:
    App\GraphQL\Schema\MyCustomFieldDefinitionMapper:
        decorates: Ibexa\GraphQL\Schema\Domain\Content\Mapper\FieldDefinition\DecoratingFieldDefinitionMapper
        arguments:
            $innerMapper: '@.inner'
```

The `$innerMapper` argument will pass the decorated mapper to the constructor.
You can use the `DecoratingFieldDefinitionMapper` from the `graphql` package.
It requires that you implement the `getFieldTypeIdentifier` method to tell which Field Type is covered by the mapper.

Add `MyCustomFieldDefinitionMapper.php` mapper to `src/GraphQL/Schema`:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/api/graphql/src/GraphQL/Schema/MyCustomFieldDefinitionMapper.php') =]]
```

> The `FieldDefinitionMapper` interface defines three methods:

Reviewer: four :)

- `mapToFieldValueType` - returns the GraphQL type value for the defined field
- `mapToFieldValueInputType` - returns the GraphQL type value for the field input value
- `mapToFieldValueResolver` - returns the resolver, as an expression language string, values are resolved with
- `mapToFieldDefinitionType`- returns the GraphQL type field definitions of the mapped type

> Only implement methods that you need, the rest will be handled by other mappers (configuration or default).

Reviewer: We need to add a note about the need to call this (with mapXXX replaced by the method it is in):

```
        if (!$this->canMap($fieldDefinition)) {
             return parent::mapToFieldValueType($fieldDefinition);
         }
```

It is required in every method that is implemented, so that other mappers are called for other field types.

        if (count($settings['selectionContentTypes']) === 1) {
            $contentType = $this->contentTypeService->loadContentTypeByIdentifier($settings['selectionContentTypes'][0]);
            $type = $this->nameHelper->itemName($contentType);
        } else {
            $type = 'Item';
        }

        if (this->isMultiple(fieldDefinition)) {
            type = "[type]";
        }

        return $type;
    }

    public function mapToFieldValueResolver(FieldDefinition $fieldDefinition): ?string
    {
        if (!$this->canMap($fieldDefinition)) {
            return parent::mapToFieldValueResolver($fieldDefinition);
        }

        isMultiple = this->isMultiple($fieldDefinition) ? 'true' : 'false';

        return sprintf('@=resolver("DomainRelationFieldValue", [field, %s])', $isMultiple);
    }

    private function isMultiple(FieldDefinition $fieldDefinition)
    {
        $constraints = $fieldDefinition->getValidatorConfiguration();

        return isset(constraints['RelationListValueValidator'])
            && constraints'RelationListValueValidator' !== 1;
  }
}
```

The value type depends on the field definition allowed Content Types setting:

> - if only one Content Type is allowed, the value will be of this type

Reviewer: Cardinality is covered below, we may not want to repeat it.

> - if there are no restrictions, or several types are allowed, the value will be an `Item`

Reviewer: We need to clarify that this applies to types that return content items.

---

> description: Add custom Field Types to GraphQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Add GraphQL support to custom Field Types.
```

---

> # Add custom Field Types to GraphQL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Add GraphQL support to custom Field Types
```

If you want to use custom Field Types in GraphQL, you need to map them.

> Their values and field definition structure, need to be defined, for GraphQL to read them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Their values and field definition structure, need to be defined, to interact with them using GraphQL.
```

For example:

| Name | Possible field value      | Resolver| Field definition|
|------|------| ------- | ------- |
| Text Line     | string | default | `TextLineFieldDefinition`    |
| Relation List | `Item` `ArticleItem` `ImageItem` | customized | `RelationListFieldDefinitio` |

## Map a custom Field Type

There are two ways to map a custom Field Type:

- configuration
- custom `FieldDefinitionMapper`

You need to write a custom `FieldDefinitionMapper` if the field definition settings and constraints impact how it is mapped to GraphQL.
For example, the selection Field Type has a "multiple" option. 
If set to false, it will accept and return a single value, 
but if set to true, it will accept and return an array of values.

> If your field definition doesn't require additional clarifications, you can map with configuration.

Author: ```suggestion
If your field definition doesn't require additional clarifications, you can map it with configuration.
```

### Map with configuration

To map a custom Field Type with configuration use a compiler pass to modify a container parameter, `ibexa.graphql.schema.content.mapping.field_definition_type`.

It is a hash that maps a Field Type identifier (`ezstring`) to the following entries:

- `value_type` - the GraphQL type values of the custom field. It can be a native type (string, int), or a custom type. If none is specified, string will be used.
- `value_resolver` - how values of this field are resolved and passed to the defined value type. If not specified, it will receive the `Field` object for the field type: `field`.
- `definition_type` - the GraphQL type the field definitions is mapped to. If not specified, it will use `FieldDefinition`.

Compiler pass example that should be placed in `src/DependencyInjection/Compiler`:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/api/graphql/src/DependencyInjection/Compiler/MyCustomTypeGraphQLCompilerPass.php') =]]
```

### Map with a custom `FieldDefinitionMapper`

The `FieldDefinitionMapper` API uses service decorators.

> To register your own mapper, make it decorate the

Author: As per Symfony doc, you decorate service: https://symfony.com/doc/current/service_container/service_decoration.html

        decorates: Ibexa\GraphQL\Schema\Domain\Content\Mapper\FieldDefinition\DecoratingFieldDefinitionMapper
        arguments:
            $innerMapper: '@.inner'
```

The `$innerMapper` argument will pass the decorated mapper to the constructor.
You can use the `DecoratingFieldDefinitionMapper` from the `graphql` package.
It requires that you implement the `getFieldTypeIdentifier` method to tell which Field Type is covered by the mapper.

Add `MyCustomFieldDefinitionMapper.php` mapper to `src/GraphQL/Schema`:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/api/graphql/src/GraphQL/Schema/MyCustomFieldDefinitionMapper.php') =]]
```

The `FieldDefinitionMapper` interface defines following methods:

- `mapToFieldValueType` - returns the GraphQL type value for the defined field
- `mapToFieldValueInputType` - returns the GraphQL type value for the field input value
- `mapToFieldValueResolver` - returns the resolver, as an expression language string, values are resolved with
- `mapToFieldDefinitionType`- returns the GraphQL type field definitions of the mapped type

Only implement methods that you need, the rest will be handled by other mappers (configuration or default).

> When the mapper method is decorated, you need to block the `if` statement for unsupported types, e.g. if (notasupportedtype) call parent method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a mapper method is decorated, you need to call the decorated service method for unsupported types.
```
